---
label: III
title: Turning a Blind Eye to Design
subtitle: Technology and Visual Impairment In Modern Museums
weight: 32
type: essay
class:
contributor:
  - id: jsanford
abstract: |

---

The modern museum, ideally, is a bastion of accessible design and planning.
Through it, guests are encouraged to explore their interests without limitation
– though some find this more difficult than others. Those with visual
impairments often find museums unwelcoming and even hostile environments. It
requires no great stretch of the imagination to discover why: filled with
inscrutably small label text, inadequate (or nonexistent) audio tours, obtuse
floor plans, and objects displayed with only the needs of the sighted in mind,
some museums seem almost purpose-built to turn away visually impaired visitors.
Despite how it may seem, this does not have to be the case. Clever
implementation of long-existing techniques and the new technological advances
alike are providing museums around the world with exciting opportunities to
engage those with visual impairments through more nuanced approaches to
wayfinding, audio description, and tactile feedback. Though individual exhibits
and museums often demonstrate an extraordinary attention to the needs of
visually impaired visitors, broader adoption of both high- and low-tech
solutions is necessary to bridge the gap between museum collections and visually
impaired persons who want to explore them. This paper will explore some of the
exciting advancements, like haptic feedback systems, enriched audio
descriptions, and self-directed audio tours, that are currently being employed
at institutions in our field.

## Defining Visual Impairment
Though they are often conflated, not all persons with visual impairments are
blind. “Visual impairment”, “low vision”, “partial sight”, and other terms have
historically been used to describe a condition “in which visual acuity is 20/70
or poorer in the better-seeing eye and cannot be corrected or improved with
regular eyeglasses”.[^1] Though neither “visual impairment” nor “legal
blindness” are functional definitions of any condition – and a range of severity
exists within the classification of “visual impairment” – for the purposes of
this work, “Persons with Vision Impairment” (PVI) will be used to denote any
persons for whom visual perceptual difficulties hinder their ability to interact
with a museum environment.[^2] According to the American Association of Museum’s
*Annual Survey of Museum-Goers*, approximately 12% of visitors to museums
self-identify as “blind or low vision”.[^3] During their museum visits, over
half of PVI surveyed in Fogle-Hatch and Winiecki’s *Assessing Attitudes of Blind Adults About Museums* reported that museum staff and volunteers did not seem comfortable interacting with them.[^4] Many also cited further barriers to
accessing museums that ranged from difficulties navigating the space to
frustrating experiences with the visual nature of many major exhibits at almost
all museums.[^5] In the face of such unmet needs, it is incumbent upon any
museum that desires to “give equitable access to everyone across the continuum
of human ability and experience” (per the AAM’s definition of accessibility) to
recognize and resolve the barriers to entry they present to PVI.[^6]

Before going any further, it should be noted that my review of museum technology
and its intersections with accessibility efforts for the visually impaired will
by no means be exhaustive. As a sighted individual, such an endeavor would be
both irresponsible and unnecessary, given the current state of literature on
this topic. For excellent examples of firsthand accounts of blind or visually
impaired museum experts, see Braham’s *The Inclusive Museum*, Kudlick’s *The Local Museum, So Near and Yet So Far*, or Kleege’s *More than Meets the Eye: What Blindness Brings to Art*.[^7] The perspective of the blind and viually impaired is comprehensive, constant, and impossible to replicate by sighted individuals. No attempt will be made here to do so. It is my hope, rather, that a review of the current uses of technology to make the museum a welcoming,
intuitive space for the visually impaired can spur institutions who have not
made such efforts into action – for, as this work will demonstrate, such efforts
are essential in fulfilling the promise of museums everywhere.

## Navigating and Wayfinding
Before PVI can interact with an exhibit, listen to the latest advances in audio
description technology and methodology, or take part in new experiences afforded
by haptics and tactile feedback-focused research, they must navigate their way
through the museum environment. This issue is illustrated concisely in Handa et
al.’s 2010 *Investigation of Priority Needs In Terms of Museum Service
Accessibility for Visually Impaired Visitors*: “even if objects are available
for touching, there is no way to know where the objects are”.[^8] Essentially,
it does not matter if the presentation of an exhibit’s content empowers the
visually impaired if they cannot find that content independently in the first
place. To overcome this most basic of barriers to entry, a number of innovative
technological solutions can be employed. A relatively low-tech option may
involve using tactile markers set into the ground in combination with textured
materials on the walls (like embossed leather, for instance) that both guide the
experience of PVI and invite the use of touch to navigate rather than sight, as
practiced in the Quai Branly Museum.[^9] The Quai Branly Museum is also amongst a growing contingent of museums that offer a 3D model of the museum itself that
can help PVI orient themselves and guide their experiences throughout the
museum, as well as a “tactile exploration guide” that can be printed out on
raised paper prior to a visitor entering the museum.[^10]

More technologically-intensive solutions have been implemented in multiple
locations in Greece, where visitors can utilize the *Blind MuseumTourer* app to
assist in navigating the Tactual Museum of the Lighthouse for the Blind of
Greece, the National Archeological Museum and the Acropolis Museum.[^11] While
using the app, a series of low-power Bluetooth sensors placed around points of
interest are used in combination with a phone’s preexisting suite of sensors to
provide directions uniquely tailored to the individual stride length of the
visitor.[^12] With their position triangulated by sensors and the length of
their stride accounted for, the accuracy of directions provided (“take 14 steps
forward and 3 to the left”, e.g.) and the integration of audio recordings
explaining points of interest allow users of *Blind MuseumTourer* to engage in a
truly self-guided experience. Similarly, Athens’ Museum of Cycladic Art uses
sensors and their own app to provide guided thematic tours that direct PVI
towards tactile elements of their exhibitions designed to be handled.[^13] Pilot
studies at New Delhi’s National Science Center have combined similar
smartphone-based technology with a small wearable device that vibrates in
certain situations to provide visitors with the ability to pick and choose the
elements in an exhibit that appeal most to them.[^14] The interface of such
systems with the crowd-sensing Bluetooth devices focused on in Germak and Khan’s
*Interaction Design Application for Museum Spaces* may further increase their
utility by enabling technologists to integrate real-time positions of other
members of the public in the navigation instructions given to PVI.[^15]

Through application of these innovative solutions, museums can augment their
existing efforts towards making the layout of their space more intelligible.
Large-print, braille labels, and well-trained docents equipped to handle the
request and needs of PVI will always be an essential part of the puzzle of
wayfinding. As the list of new technological solutions grows ever-longer,
however, museums everywhere must ask themselves if the bare minimum of
navigation assistance is too low of a standard to hold themselves to.

## Enhanced Audio Description
While traditional audio tours are certainly helpful, the opportunities presented
by “enhanced” or “enriched” audio description – which focuses not merely on the
translation of visual content into an audio format but the creation of a unique
auditory landscape – can enhance the experience of PVI and sighted individuals
alike.[^16] Indeed, when museums devote focus to exploring what their audio
tours can offer, the results are often surprising. “Enriched” audio descriptions
are not strictly defined, but usually are recognized as audio descriptions that
incorporate “semantic or factual details as well as highlights of a piece, which
help the listener create a story about that piece” as well as “a rich range of
multisensory imagery and metaphor”.[^17] The shift to an audio-focused method of
information intake “can enhance later memorability of an experience, for both
blind and sighted people”.[^18] Enriched audio experiences that incorporate
narration and soundscapes have been noted to positively correlate with the
amount of time that guests spend taking in the information presented to
them.[^19]

In her PhD thesis on audio descriptions in museums, Rachel Hutchinson expounds
not only the potential benefits of enriched audio in the museum but also the
wide range of theory and practice that dictates how audio descriptions are
currently used.[^20] Audio description, as traditionally defined and used in the
museum field, is an attempt at the “translation of visual information…
[seemingly] designed above all else to address the category of ‘object
experiences’ – enabling visitors to ‘see’ rare or valuable objects”.[^21] Most
museum professionals would probably argue, however, that merely seeing an object
constitutes only a small part of the experience of visiting a museum. When
attempting to emulate the cognitive, introspective, and social experiences that
make up the rest of the museum experience, those working with audio descriptions
must contend with the complexity of translation ethics.[^22] Where, for
instance, should a museum draw the line between explaining the history of a work
of art and interpreting that art *for* the visitor? At what point does so-called
“enriched” audio description become a cultural text unto itself? Should those
working on audio descriptions be wary of making statements about non-visual
aspects of the art, or encouraged to use language that evokes a multisensory
experience? Though the answers to these questions will vary from museum to
museum (surveys show that European describers are more open to creating
descriptions that “explore meaning” and “create emotional experiences”) they
underscore the truth of the vast opportunities provided by smartphones and other
technologies when it comes to audio description: it can only ever be as
impactful as an institution allows it to be.[^23]

*Features From Qatar*, a 2015 Mathaf exhibit of an original 1973 painting by
Jassim Zaini, is a prime example of how responding to these ethical questions
can provide novel solutions that make the most of current technology. After a
long period of analyzing the work itself, carefully editing the script of the
audio description, and creating a soundscape that would accompany the audio
guide (composed of music and audio cues that evoked the location and ambience of
the painting), the exhibit went live.[^24] PVI could access the enriched audio
as a .mp4 file through any device they had on hand.[^25] The
response—overwhelmingly positive, but with a wealth of constructive
critiques—led project lead Joselia Neves to conclude that “there is an enormous
potential for Enriched Descriptive Guides as a specific museum text type that
can contribute to visitor engagement”.[^26]

In taking these measures towards inclusive and accessible design for PVI, museum
workers engage in a far more involved process of meaning-making. Though the
ethical questions that enriched description poses are daunting, the ease of
access that such efforts enable are important steps in developing a museum that
is open to all.

## Haptics and Tactile Response

Some of the most exciting work being done in the museum field to cater to the
needs of PVI involves the use of *haptics*, or technology that makes use of
one’s sense of touch, in transforming visual information into a more accessible
format. Haptic technology can take many forms: it can be used to enhance color
recognition, create tactile-focused versions of paintings and other printed art,
provide facsimiles of 3D art that are available for visually impaired visitors
to touch and handle, develop wholly virtual recreations of famous works of art
(accessible through specialized machinery that mimics the 3D rendering of the
piece in VR), and more. The uses of tactile sensation in the museum setting
presented below are just a sampling of what the technologies that drive them
have to offer.

Investigations of the uses of such technologies can be difficult to grasp: some instances of haptic feedback systems within the museum are positioned as novel, while other efforts at making visual information tactile are well-established. Take, for instance, the case of the Louvre’s Tactile Gallery: since its inception in 1995, the Tactile Gallery has provided visually impaired visitors to the world’s most-visited museum with reproductions of famous works that they can touch and feel [(fig 4)](#fig-sanford-04).[^27] On the other hand, an interactive computer-based exhibition at the Mm Gerdau Museum Of Mines And Metal that merges tactile exploration with intelligent audio descriptions matching the objects being touched (if, for instance, the visitor picks up two of the five objects on display, the exhibitor machine will begin to explain the similarities and differences between those objects) was recently tested to great effect.[^28] Neither of these uses of technology are particularly resource-intensive nor radically different from what museums around the world already offer visitors on a day-to-day basis (especially with the advent of low-cost 3D printing technology), but each can fundamentally alter and greatly enhance the experience of PVI in the museum setting.

{{< q-figure id="fig-sanford-04" >}}<a name="fig-sanford-04"></a>

Though it may seem to be on the cutting edge of technological advancement, haptic displays that replicate the feeling of touching an object (achieved through force feedback on the hands and vibratory stimuli) has been in development since the turn of the 21st century.[^29] Jansson et. al.’s development of a system that mimics the feeling of touching a sculpture for the E.U.’s PURE-FORM project in 2001 was the precursor of modern advances in museum haptic technology that are radically changing what experiences are open to PVI.[^30] The National Museum of Transylvanian History has used a relatively simple haptic device—the Geomagic Touch System, which consists of a stylus on a mechanical arm that can provide force feedback [(fig 5)](#fig-sanford-05)—to provide visitors with an intuitive yet novel experience in which they can “touch” a range of 3D-scanned artifacts from the museum’s collection.[^31]

{{< q-figure id="fig-sanford-05" >}}<a name="fig-sanford-05"></a>

Cost is rightfully a concern whenever the adoption of new technologies is
attempted by museums. Fortunately, the distance between what a museum can spare
and the costs of implementing haptic technologies may be substantially smaller
than some would imagine. Prototype devices custom-built for educators have been
produced for less than \$300.[^32] The aforementioned Geomagic Touch, if
purchased with the associated Sculpt software that allows museum workers to
design and scan the objects in their collections, can cost anywhere from \$900
to \$3300 (depending on the condition of the device).[^33] More advanced
systems, like the Museo Archeologico Nazionale delle Marche’s haptic application
that uses an Omega-6 machine produced by haptic-tech company Force Dimension,
trade a higher price for a higher level of detail in the digital reproduction of
artifacts.[^34] The Museo Archeologico’s system was found to greatly influence
the level of visitor engagement with the museum’s collection and the overall
visitor experience and showcases how efforts at PVI accessibility can often
result in a more enriching experience for all.[^35] At the Prague National
Gallery, the exhibition *Touching Masterpieces* showcased some of the most
advanced haptic technologies currently available and outfitted visitors with a
set of haptic gloves that could reproduce the feeling of touching the Venus de
Milo and other pieces in real space.[^36]

Perhaps the most exciting implications of the use of haptic technology comes
from studies like Park et. al.’s *Telerobotic Haptic Exploration in Art
Galleries and Museums for Individuals with Visual Impairments*, in which PVI can
remotely explore a museum’s collection through haptics.[^37] The act of making a
museum’s collection available virtually is nothing new, but the upload of 3D
renders of a museum’s objects can allow PVI to bring the experience of touching
that collection into the comfort of their own homes. This is by no means a
replacement for the full experience of visiting a museum space, but can serve as
a means to virtually explore the collections of a museum in the same manner that
sighted individuals have been able to for decades.

## Conclusion

What the vast differences between the many effective methodologies above imply
is sure to be familiar to many museum professionals: the solutions that work for
one institution may not be applicable to another, and the unique nature of a
particular museum’s collection should drive the efforts in implementing
accessible technologies. While for some the more technology-heavy solutions
(like *Touching Masterpieces*) may be within their institutional reach, others
may only be able to lay down simple tactile tape for wayfinding or provide brief
audio descriptions. Yet another well-worn precept of museum work comes in to
play here: museum workers should not allow the perfect to be the enemy of the
good. Any effort to provide an inclusive experience for PVI, no matter how
inadequate it may seem when ranked against industry-leading solutions at major
institutions, has the potential to completely change the museum experience for a
subset of guests that have for too long been left without adequate attention.

The needs of the visually impaired pale in comparison to the number of solutions
that empathetic museum professionals can design into their exhibits and
institutions that can make our industry accessible to them. Technology and
careful planning provide us with near-limitless potential when it comes to
making wayfinding easier, audio descriptions more effective, and art, quite
literally, within our visitors’ grasp. These efforts need not all be
wheel-redesigning, boundary-breaking technological marvels. The single unifying
factor between each of the successful iterations of PVI-inclusive museum
technology detailed above was not the budget of the team or the novelty of the
gadgets used –– far from it. The most PVI-accessible implementations of
technology are those that represent the truth that true accessibility is not an
item on a checklist, but rather that it is an evolving process that demands
inclusion of visually impaired perspectives throughout.

Technological advances will continue to provide potential engagement
opportunities for PVI. Until their input and feedback is recognized by the
museums that claim to represent them, however, no true progress can be made.
Including PVI perspectives throughout the design process of any new exhibit ––
through meaningful and empathetic dialogue, to start –– is the only way to
provide accessibility that is anything more than performative. Conducting
“outreach” misses the point -– visually impaired visitors do not need to be
reached out to. They are already in attendance and they have been expressing
their dissatisfaction with our museums for as long as we have existed. Once
those perspectives have been incorporated into a design process, the usage of
technology to address their concerns can begin. Put simply, technology can be an
excellent tool, but not while museums remain willfully blind to the needs of the
visually impaired.

## Notes

[^1]: “Low Vision and Legal Blindness Terms and Descriptions,” The American
    Foundation for the Blind, n.d.,
    https://www.afb.org/blindness-and-low-vision/eye-conditions/low-vision-and-legal-blindness-terms-and-descriptions.

[^2]: “Vision Impairment and Blindness,” n.d.,
    https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment.

[^3]: “Data Stories,” Wilkening Consulting, n.d.,
    http://www.wilkeningconsulting.com/data-stories.html.

[^4]: “Assessing Attitudes of Blind Adults about Museums – MW20 \| Online,” n.d.,
    https://mw20.museweb.net/paper/assessing-attitudes-of-blind-adults-about-museums/.

[^5]: “Assessing Attitudes of Blind Adults about Museums – MW20 \| Online.”

[^6]: “Diversity, Equity, Accessibility and Inclusion,” American Alliance of
    Museums, n.d.,
    https://www.aam-us.org/programs/diversity-equity-accessibility-and-inclusion/.

[^7]: Braham, “The Inclusive Museum,” Prime Access Consulting, October 1, 2018,
      https://www.pac.bz/blog/the-inclusive-museum/; Catherine Kudlick, “The Local
      History Museum, So Near and Yet So Far,” *The Public Historian* 27, no. 2
      (2005): 75–81, https://doi.org/10.1525/tph.2005.27.2.75; Georgina Kleege,
      *More than Meets the Eye: What Blindness Brings to Art* (New York: Oxford        University Press, 2018), https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190604356.001.0001.

[^8]: Kozue Handa, Hitoshi Dairoku, and Yoshiko Toriyama, “Investigation of
    Priority Needs in Terms of Museum Service Accessibility for Visually
    Impaired Visitors,” *British Journal of Visual Impairment* 28, no. 3
    (September 1, 2010): 221–34, https://doi.org/10.1177/0264619610374680.

[^9]: Kailin Wang, “Tactile Navigation System For People with Visual Impairments
    In Museum,” in *2020 International Conference on Innovation Design and Digital Technology (ICIDDT)*, 2020, 410–14,
    https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIDDT52279.2020.00082.

[^10]: “Visual impairments,” n.d.,
    https://www.quaibranly.fr/en/menu-accessibilite/visual-impairments/.

[^11]: Apostolos Meliones and Demetrios Sampson, “Blind MuseumTourer: A System for
    Self-Guided Tours in Museums and Blind Indoor Navigation,” *Technologies* 6,
    no. 1 (March 2018): 4, https://doi.org/10.3390/technologies6010004.

[^12]: Meliones and Sampson.

[^13]: Roberto Vaz, Diamantino Freitas, and António Coelho, *Perspectives of
    Visually Impaired Visitors on Museums: Towards an Integrative and
    Multisensory Framework to Enhance the Museum Experience*, 2020,
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3439231.3439272.

[^14]: Dhruv Jain, “Pilot Evaluation of a Path-Guided Indoor Navigation System for
    Visually Impaired in a Public Museum,” in *Proceedings of the 16th
    International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility*, ASSETS
    ’14 (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014), 273–74,
    https://doi.org/10.1145/2661334.2661405.

[^15]: Claudio Germak and Sara Khan, “Interaction Design Applications for Museum
    Spaces. New Exhibit Paths Driven by a Bluetooth Sensor’s System,” *The
    Design Journal* 20, no. sup1 (July 28, 2017): S3914–24,
    https://doi.org/10.1080/14606925.2017.1352893.      

[^16]: Santoshi Halder and Lori Czop Assaf, “Enriched Audio Description: Working
    Towards an Inclusive Museum Experience,” in *Inclusion, Disability and Culture: An Ethnographic Perspective Traversing Abilities and Challenges*
    (Cham, SWITZERLAND: Springer International Publishing AG, 2017),
    http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gwu/detail.action?docID=4856901;
    Gretchen Henrich, Felice Q. Cleveland, and Emily Wolverton, “Case Studies
    from Three Museums in Art Beyond Sight’s Multi-Site Museum Accessibility
    Study,” *Museums & Social Issues* 9, no. 2 (October 1, 2014): 124–43,
    https://doi.org/10.1179/1559689314Z.00000000023; Beaux Fen Guarini, “Beyond
    Braille on Toilet Doors: Museum Curators and Audiences with Vision
    Impairment,” *M/C Journal* 18, no. 4 (August 7, 2015),
    https://doi.org/10.5204/mcj.1002.

[^17]: Halder and Assaf, “Enriched Audio Description: Working Towards an Inclusive
    Museum Experience.”

[^18]: Alison F. Eardley and Linda Pring, “Remembering the Past and Imagining the
    Future: A Role for Nonvisual Imagery in the Everyday Cognition of Blind and
    Sighted People,” *Memory* 14, no. 8 (November 1, 2006): 925–36,
    https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210600859582.

[^19]: Eardley and Pring.

[^20]: R. Hutchinson, “Museums for All: Towards Engaging, Memorable Museum
    Experiences through Inclusive Audio Description” (doctoral, University of
    Westminster, 2019),
    https://westminsterresearch.westminster.ac.uk/item/v01vw/museums-for-all-towards-engaging-memorable-museum-experiences-through-inclusive-audio-description.

[^21]: Hutchinson.

[^22]: Hutchinson.

[^23]: Rachel S. Hutchinson and Alison F. Eardley, “The Accessible Museum: Towards
    an Understanding of International Audio Description Practices in Museums,”
    *Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness* 114, no. 6 (November 1, 2020):
    475–87, https://doi.org/10.1177/0145482X20971958.

[^24]: “Cultus \_9_Volume_2_2016.Pdf,” accessed October 31, 2021,
    http://www.cultusjournal.com/files/Archives/Cultus9_2016_2/cultus%20_9_Volume_2_2016.pdf.

[^25]: “Cultus \_9_Volume_2_2016.Pdf.”

[^26]: “Cultus \_9_Volume_2_2016.Pdf.”

[^27]: Natacha Rios The Associated Press, “Please Touch: Louvre Opens Room for
    Blind and Visually Impaired,” Arizona Daily Star, n.d.,
    https://tucson.com/entertainment/please-touch-louvre-opens-room-for-blind-and-visually-impaired/article_d3c73526-023a-5107-bed9-1b58abfa9352.html.

[^28]: Roberto Vaz, Paula Odete Fernandes, and Ana Cecília Rocha Veiga, “Designing
    an Interactive Exhibitor for Assisting Blind and Visually Impaired Visitors
    in Tactile Exploration of Original Museum Pieces,” *Procedia Computer Science*, CENTERIS 2018 - International Conference on ENTERprise Information
    Systems / ProjMAN 2018 - International Conference on Project MANagement /
    HCist 2018 - International Conference on Health and Social Care Information
    Systems and Technologies, CENTERIS/ProjMAN/HCist 2018, 138 (January 1,
    2018): 561–70, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.10.076.

[^29]: Gunnar Jansson, Massimo Bergamasco, and Antonio Frisoli, “A New Option for
    the Visually Impaired to Experience 3D Art at Museums: Manual Exploration of
    Virtual Copies,” *Visual Impairment Research* 5, no. 1 (April 2003): 1,
    https://doi.org/10.1076/vimr.5.1.1.15973.

[^30]: Chung Hyuk Park, Eun-Seok Ryu, and Ayanna M. Howard, “Telerobotic Haptic
    Exploration in Art Galleries and Museums for Individuals with Visual
    Impairments,” *IEEE Transactions on Haptics* 8, no. 3 (July 2015): 327–38,
    https://doi.org/10.1109/TOH.2015.2460253.

[^31]: Radu Comes, “HAPTIC DEVICES AND TACTILE EXPERIENCES IN MUSEUM EXHIBITIONS,”
    *JOURNAL OF ANCIENT HISTORY AND ARCHAEOLOGY* 3 (December 30, 2016),
    https://doi.org/10.14795/j.v3i4.205.

[^32]: Ahmad Javaid, Hammad Munawar, and Mohammad Armughan Mohyuddin, “A Low Cost
    1-DoF Encounter Type Haptic Device for Use in Education,” *2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation in Industry (ICRAI)*,
    2019, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRAI47710.2019.8967395.

[^33]: “Touch,” 3D Systems, June 9, 2016,
    https://www.3dsystems.com/haptics-devices/touch.

[^34]: Silvia Ceccacci et al., “The Role of Haptic Feedback and Gamification in
    Virtual Museum Systems,” *Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage* 14,
    no. 3 (July 1, 2021): 38:1-38:14, https://doi.org/10.1145/3453074.

[^35]: Ceccacci et al.

[^36]: Veronica Riavis, “Discovering Architectural Artistic Heritage Through the
    Experience of Tactile Representation: State of the Art and New Development,”
    *DISEGNARECON* 12, no. 23 (December 31, 2019): 10-10.9.

[^37]: Park, Ryu, and Howard, “Telerobotic Haptic Exploration in Art Galleries and
    Museums for Individuals with Visual Impairments.”
